Well, we were tidying up the pre-war bit. You were
asking questions. I think we ought to get a move on
and talk about the wartime period. All right. Or
have you got anything else there? No. As a matter of
fact, you've answered my questions there. Now,
when did you develop an interest in the
submarines? This is the first time I contact you
with the war. Well, we developed an interest in
submarines before the war. Because we were
measuring gravity in submarines. We didn't get
much done before the war because something was
always going wrong. There were these crises, the
Munich crisis, for example, stopped us using a
submarine. I didn't ever go out in the submarines
before the war. This other man, Brown, was doing
that.
I never had pretty much to do with submarines
during the war.
Well, shall I? start talking about how I got
involved with the Navy. Right, exactly. That's
where I want you to begin, and then talk about
minesweeping. Yes. Well, it seemed to me, about
1938, that it was likely there was going to be a war.
Actually, I didn't think there was, but I mean,
there was obviously a reasonable possibility of
it. And I thought it would be nice to keep our small
group together. We had, we were a very small group,
there was this man I've talked about, Brown, who'd
been doing the work on the submarines, there was
myself, there was this assistant, and a couple of
graduate students, so there were five or six of us.
And I thought it might be nice to keep the work, the
group together and to the war and also relevant to
our peacetime interests. And Ewing had much the
same idea about the same time. And I had quite a
struggle actually to get into the Navy, to get the
Admiralty to accept the idea at all. The Admiralty
Scientific Organization before the war was
somewhat unsuccessful. They had a rather low
prestige at the service. They were paid a bit less
than the corresponding naval officers. They had a
chip on their shoulder about this. And there'd
been very little money, of course, for the
services between the wars. I mean, you just had one
war and you'd won it. Naturally, you don't spend a
lot of money on defense. And then this attitude
hung over into the Hitler period. The defense
budgets were opposed every year. in detail by the
Labour Party and there was always a row every year
about the financing of defence. And they'd been in
a very poor way so far as developing the things that
needed to be developed. Well, I went round and I saw
the man who was looking after recruiting
scientific personnel and I said, look, why don't
you take the whole thing as a package deal? And he
said that he estimated the number of scientists
required by the Navy at 30. number of extra ones if
war broke out. And I said I didn't much believe it.
We went on and I think the thing that finally
decided me was that I'd discovered how sonar
worked and what the frequencies were and
everything. Because we'd been out with the naval
ship doing seismic work and I'd kept my eyes open
and learnt quite a lot about what the navy was doing
and so on. And I think he thought it was safer to have
me inside than wandering around outside. At any
rate, I started off by going to the anti-submarine
establishment. And this was a pretty
unsatisfactory organization. And I think I was
building up for a row with the management of it when
I was suddenly removed. I think they saw the red
light that I was going to be a bloody nuisance. And
so I suddenly got transferred to protecting ships
from magnetic mines. Now, I've told this story, I
think I've told it in print. I wrote a... Now, I'm
not sure that I have, but let me tell you the story.
You're not going to publish this stuff, are you?
It's an understanding between us that you aren't
going to publish this stuff with descriptions to
me. I mean, I don't want suits for the library. Cut
it off from me. Okay.
Next piece, I have placed certain restrictions on
it. Well, I found myself working with a group who
were interested in demagnetizing ships to
prevent them being blown up by magnetic mines. And
it was a real comic opera show. I was put to work with
a man whose name I will not mention. And he was a
little older than me, probably five or ten years
older than me. And he put me to stand on the quay. And
he made a measurement, and when he made his
measurement, he waved his arm, and I then said,
move her along 10 feet, Skipper. And Skipper moved
the boat along a key 10 feet, and he took another
measurement. Well, the only question was how long
I'd let this go on for. I was 30, 31 at the time, and I
let it go on for a day or two, and then fate played
into my hands. Along came a committee which was
inquiring into the Admiralty's use of scientific
manpower. And the chairman of it was Ray Fowler, a
well-known physicist, a friend of mine,
son-in-law of Rutherford's, married
Rutherford's daughter. And he came up to me and
said, what are you doing? And I described it in just
the words I've given you now. And he said, do you
think this is a good thing? And I said, well, you can
judge that. And then I thought, this might not be
sufficient, so I thought I'd better emphasize the
matter. So I went around that evening and saw the
admiral, who was staying in a hotel in Portsmouth,
who was in charge of all the anti-mine operations.
And I went to see him and I said, look, we're having
trouble about reports. Old so-and-so is running
this show, can't make up his mind whether the ship
sailed from left to right or right to left. And we
redrafted the diagram several times and there's
been a lot of delay in getting the reports out. But I
have black market copies of these reports of which
I can supply you. And he looked at me and said, I
think I'd like one. So I wasn't sure what he was
going to do. I thought he might be very indignant
because he's now the lead admiral. And so I said,
well, that's all right. I'll regularly supply
reports a week or two ahead on their issue. And then
the next day, I was, in the middle of the morning, I
was asked to go around and meet a committee and I
found my admiral in the chair and my friend from the
committee that was inquiring into admiralty
who's a scientific manpower next to him and a
number of other civilians and naval officers
there. And they said, I wasn't sure what was going
to happen, but they said, look, will you take over
the direction of this show? And I said, what show
precisely? And they, rather to my surprise, said,
not only the things I've been concerned with, but a
rather wider group of things. And I said, yes, I'd
be pleased to take it over, but I have a condition.
And they said, well, what's the condition? I said
that six people named by me be removed from the
project. And I then got rid of all, they said they
agreed to this, and I got rid of all the permits that
the servants had. we reached an agreement that
they would form a small group not responsible to me
to investigate the longer term matters. Well, the
war was only going to last a finite time, so I wasn't
very interested in anything that the civil
service called a longer term project. So then the
first time I was in charge of something, the first
time in my life when I'd ever had a group of people
responsible to me. I had a naval officer member, a
lieutenant commander called Hex Lewis, and he and
I were responsible for this group. And there were,
at the peak of the thing, we had 50 naval officers
and about 50 civilians and a decent sized group. It
was the first time I'd ever been able really to do
things on a large scale and had a what was really a
project. This was the start. I'd learnt how to
manipulate the Navy, how to get your way, you see,
by a sort of rather cheerful openness and assuming
that everything would come out right and so on. I
must have learnt awfully quickly because I had
never before been charged of anything more than
two graduate students. Before the war I'd had two
graduate students and suddenly I'd got this
project and the naval officer, who was my opposite
number, was very helpful to me. He knew much more
than I did about how the world worked and how to run
things. And we had the greatest fun with it. We had
this tremendous success with the acoustic mine,
with the demagnetizing of ships and so on. We had to
move out of Portsmouth because it was being bombed
and we were spending all our time ending damage. I
took the thing up to Scotland and we went up to a
place on the west coast of Scotland and then almost
at once I was called down to the Admiralty and I went
to see the Director of Torpedoes and Mining, a man
called Captain Middleton, and he said, look, we
think we've got an acoustic mine. And I said, well,
why do you think so? Are you sure? And he sent me
around to see the intelligence people. And I was
convinced they were right. They had got an
acoustic line. So I then went back to the director
of torpedoes and mining. He said, I want you to do
something about this. Leave the people in
Scotland and do something about it. So I said, all
right, what do you want me to do? He said, I don't
know. That's your business. Go and do something.
So I suddenly... had to start a new organization
for dealing with acoustic mines. And very soon I
found myself in charge of all development of
minesweeping, development of methods of
minesweeping from the civilian side. I had a naval
officer number. And what I did was we'd been
operating in, we'd taken over a dance hall. We'd
been operating in this dance hall. And we'd left it
because the whole place had been wrecked. And we
burnt the pier later. Anyway, I decided to go back
into this place. It was the only place I was quite
sure I could get quickly. So we went back into this
dance hall and told the post office that the wicked
people who'd had it last had removed all the
telephones. Would they please come and put a new
lot of telephones in? And we also set up a little
show in Hairidge. And we started off after
acoustic mines. And this was a real success. No
acoustic mine practically ever sank a ship again.
We had wonderful fun with this. And, well, I don't
think there's any point in going into it in detail,
but this was a new thing to me, a new sort of world,
quite rather different from the ordinary
scientific world. It was not a competitive thing.
It was a group of people with a common object trying
to achieve a particular object. And also, of
course, it was to some extent the effort to inflate
one's own organization, the typical thing, the
Parkinson syndrome, where you try and build up
your own organization. And by this time, of
course, we were more or less official wizards. We
could get anything we wanted. I mean, there was a
transformation now. Before the war, we couldn't
get 10 pounds. Now we could have anything we
wanted. And we presumed on this. We did anything we
bloody well liked. a young man coming in one day and
saying, look, I hope you don't mind, I've taken
over the Portsmouth Yacht Club. Well, the
Portsmouth Yacht Club is a very sort of
upper-crust organisation. And this young man had
simply gone in and commandeered it. And I said,
well, I suppose it's all right, what do you want it
for? He told me what he wanted to do there. And I
said, well, all right, go and get the paperwork
done, go and see the administrative people, tell
them to go through the paperwork and compensate
the Yacht Club and all that. And we took over... A
rich man's yacht, I remember, because we thought
it might be nice for some purpose or other. We might
want it to go somewhere. And unfortunately, it got
hit by a shell coming through the Straits of Douma,
so we never really got it.
And well, then we burnt the pier associated with
this dance hall. And then shortly after that, the
whole place got burnt, our firefighting party.
was engaged in rescuing a lady we all liked very
much in a local pub. She was a barmaid in a local pub,
a girl called Piggy. By the way, I should have said
the only bit that I wish to place restrictions on is
the little piece about the incompetence of the
people at Portsmouth before I took charge. It's
only about half a minute. I don't want the rest of
this, you're quite free to do as you like. but
simply the bit about the man I stood on the pier
with, and he waved his hand, and I said, move along
ten feet, and the bit about how we got the six people
removed from the project. I would like that not to
be used without your asking me whether I approve
the passage. I shan't be unduly restrictive about
it, but I've just got to guard myself against
accusations of libel. Right. Well, anyway, we
then... We then decided that Portsmouth had
become uninhabitable. We went up to Edinburgh and
we set up an organisation there. We took over part
of a school and set ourselves up there. It was a
curious incident in which I was driving around
Edinburgh looking for a suitable building and I
saw a great big building on the top of a hill. I said,
let's go and look at that. What is it? They said, oh,
that is Fitties College, which is a public school.
Well, I thought it's time I got my own back on the
headmaster of a public school. So I went in to see
the headmaster and told him we were thinking of
taking over the school. And I got no result at all,
because he just said, that would be a good thing,
because I'm sure the public schools are finished,
and we should get a lot of compensation. And then I
had to confess all I was going to take over was one of
the houses. And he was worried about this, because
he said the army were at present occupying it, and
he thought they'd do more damage than we would. And
I said this was a superficial view. The army would
undoubtedly wreck the building. But we would do
much more than wreck it. We would build
attachments, build tanks all around it. And we
would knock down partition walls. We would do real
structural damage. Whereas the army would only
sort of muck up the paintwork and write rude words
on the ceilings and that kind of thing. And so he
said he was very well satisfied with this. I
imagine they had to rebuild a building to finish
it. Well, anyway, we had another of these
successes.
I think the sinkings from mining never again
reached 10% of the sinkings from submarines in any
month in the war or something like that. I forget
the actual figures. I published an account of this
to which I can give you a reference. Did you have any
cooperation with the US Navy research in this
area? Well, we had a funny thing. We decided the US
Navy were not taking the mining problem
seriously. Because for them, it was potentially
very serious. The submarines could operate off
the east coast of the United States, and they could
lay mines and block up the harbors. And so we asked
the US Naval attache to come down and have dinner
with us. And he came down, and we talked to him and
told him what we were spending and what we were
doing. And I got the impression we weren't having
much effect. And what I didn't realize was that in
dealing with an American bureaucracy, one is not
fighting friction, one's fighting inertia. It
gets moving rather slowly, but every bit of
pushing you do has its effect. It's not like when
you push against friction, nothing happens until
you reach a critical push. So that in fact, we went
on pushing much too long. And an enormous and very
extravagant organization appeared over here,
particularly for protecting ships and magnetic
mines. And we spent the rest of the war trying to
damp it down on the grounds that it was an
extravagance. Well, anyway, at this point,
somewhere about the beginning of 41, I began to
feel that we'd taken the guilt off the subject of
mines and things, and no ships much were being
sunk. We'd done a good job on hypothetical minds
and what we might do in the future, and I asked to get
out of it. So I then got out of it. I'd learned a great
deal about how the Navy works, about the Navy,
about how to work on a large scale at sea, how to do
all kinds of things. And I'd learned about naval
officers and the sort of things you could do with
them and the things you couldn't. We'd survived
various disasters in which we'd bust up bits of
battleships, that kind of thing. We once broke the
back of an American force track destroyer, I
remember, in a misfortune. Well, and all these
kinds of things. Well, then I went up to the
Admiralty, and I went to work with the Director of
Scientific Research in the Admiralty. And very
soon after this, I was a rash young man, a young man
in a hurry, and I decided that the original place
I'd been to at the beginning of the war, the
anti-submarine establishment, the direction of
it had become intolerable, and we must remove the
direction of it. And I don't know if the man
concerned is dead, and I think I'd better restrict
this piece. But I said, to the director of
scientific research that he must get rid of this
man and remove him to somewhere else, that he was
not running a good show in the anti-submarine
side, it was ineffective, he was an egomaniac, and
was keeping a very tight, close control over
anything, he was not getting the best out of his
people, and it was going to be a bloody awful row.
And the director of scientific research, Daryl
Charlie Wright, refused to remove the man. And I
said, well, I won't work for you. If you say that, I
won't work for you. I'm walking out on you. You can
do what you bloody well like about it. And then a
very curious state of affairs ensued. I went
across the road and went to see Patrick Blackett,
who was just inventing operations analysis, and
went to work with him. And I kept forgetting that I
wasn't on speaking terms with Charlie Wright, the
representative of research. He used to cut me in
the street. And finally, there was a thing called
the Midnight Follies, which was a meeting once a
month with the first sea lord, and most of the other
sea lords, to have an account of the state of the
war. And about, I saw right there, and I thought
it's absurd that you continue this argument, so I
sat down, obviously across a rather narrow table.
He looked this way, and he looked that way, and he
wouldn't look me in the face. And finally, after
the thing broke up, I saw him standing, in front of
the first sea lord and the third sea lord, who was
his own boss. And I knew that he was frightened of
admirals. And so I went up to him and said, all
right, it is nice to see you. And he looked at me. He
looked both ways. And he saw these two admirals
standing there. And he put his hand on my shoulder
and said, my dear Bullard, it is indeed nice to see
you again. And ever since then, we've been
buddies. And this curious thing, the last time I
had anything to do with him was a few months ago. I
was in Victoria, British Columbia. And I called
him up and said, look, I'm awfully sorry. I was
hoping to come and see you, but I can't. I haven't
got time. I'll see you next time I'm here. And he
said, I don't think you will. And he died a month
later. He was a dear man in a completely wrong job. A
gentle, intelligent man who, after he retired
three times in all, and he had this job as Director
of Scientific Research in the Admiralty, which he
was completely unable to carry out, really. It was
a disaster. Well, I think because he's dead, and
because he was a friend of mine, that little piece
ought to be restricted in the sense I'd like to know
what people say about it before they use it. Well,
then I got into operations analysis and direction
of the war, use of facilities. The idea was that the
war was by now getting pretty far along. This was
getting on in the middle or late 41, probably
August 41.
It was dubious if any new technical developments
would really have a critical effect. And then, of
course, not very long after this, the Americans
and the Russians came in at the end of December 41,
and the war was clearly won. It was only a matter of
time. And the important thing was to have rational
views on the use of forces, things like the size of
convoys, questions of this sort.
I started taking interest in all these questions.
It didn't really suit me all that well, I don't
think. I hadn't got Blackett's optimism of the
importance of what we were doing. And I rather
drifted off into the interpretation of
intelligence in terms of operations. And I had a
curious job for a while looking after
intelligence on V weapons. The flying bombs and
rockets. I was the admiralty representative on a
committee on this subject. And I went there, and I
was also a member of this curious little
committee. There was a high level service
committee, which I was the admiralty
representative. And then there was a working
level committee on intelligence connected with
these things, a very curious kind. The war office
was represented by a man who ran a chain of
laundries in peacetime. The invasion armies were
represented by an Oxford philosopher. I
represented the Admiralty. And the Air Force was
represented by the dumbest air commodore anyone
who had ever seen. And this was a very curious body
indeed. I mean, very important things hung on it.
How much effort should you use? to destroy the
flying bomb sites in France. It meant diverting
bomber effort from Germany. What was the proper
balance on this? How did you persuade the Air Force
that the threat was serious? And it wasn't just the
Air Force maintained. It was just a method of
diverting effort from the bombing of Germany. It
was all a spoof. And all this kind of thing. And I got
deeply interested in this. And then in the middle
of it, I suddenly got pulled out And if you've got to
go now... No, no, I'm trying to keep the tape. Ah,
yes, sure. Well, in the middle of it, there was
trouble, because Duncan Sands, who was
Churchill's son-in-law, was chairman of the
high-level committee, and the air ministry
representative was the commander-in-chief of
fighter command. And the commander-in-chief of
fighter command was a man called Roderick Hill,
who was a wonderful man. I was devoted to him. And he
was getting in trouble. He wouldn't bring an
officer with him who knew about the details, and he
really didn't know the details, and he was making
an ass of himself. And it was an embarrassment to
Sands and everyone, and Sands didn't like him. And
Sands suggested that I join his staff and look
after all the details of this. And Hill said he
wouldn't have anyone recommended by Sands,
because Sands was not universally popular, to the
least of it. Then at a cocktail party, I met Hill
again. And he said, look, are you the man Sands is
trying to foist on me? And I said, yes. And he said, I
believe we've got a deal. So I went out to work at
Fighter Command, and essentially to protect Hill
from politicians. Various people in Sands'
entourage, Sands was Churchill's son-in-law and
member of parliament. the minister, and he was
sending his dogs' bodies out, who went through the
files of Fighter Command, looking for rude
letters about sands, of which there were plenty.
And my job was to keep these people out of the place,
without defending sands so much that there was a
row. And so I was normally head of the operations
analysis of Fighter Command, but in fact I was
political protector to the commander-in-chief.
And this was really most entertaining. And after
the sights had been overrun in France, I said,
well, this is now finished. I'll go back to the
Admiralty. So I went off back to the Admiralty. And
a month or so later, Roddy Hill called me up and
said, look, would you go over to France and see that
we don't have a lot of fuss there? Because there
were rockets being fired at Antwerp. And so I had a
lovely time. I said, well, look, give me a staff of
some sort. And he supplied a group captain and a
squad leader and a couple of WAFs and that kind of
thing. And we went over just after Christmas, I
think it was, 44, to set up an organization in
France to make sure that no one could complain
about what was happening about flying bombs in
France. And we decided the war was obviously won,
and we might as well see how big an organization we
could set up before it finished. We got up to 2,000,
I think. We published a daily newspaper of some
sort in Paris. I think we actually laid a cable
under the channel. We certainly had a dedicated
cable under the channel of our own for
transmitting information.